# Java HashMap Examples

## HashMap in Java: Methods and Functions

### How to Initialize 

Initialize HashMap data structure example:

```java
Map<String, Integer> map = new HashMap<>();
```

A string is a type of key in the map, Integer is a type of a value.

### How To Put Value

There are 3 methods to put value/values into HashMap:

* **public V put(K key, V value)** - puts a value for a key.
* **public void putAll(Map<? extends K, ? extends V> m)** - puts all values from another HashMap into current one.
* **public V putIfAbsent(K key, V value)** - if key is not already associated with a value, puts a given value and return null, otherwise returns current value.

Example:

```java
map.put("Key1", 1);
map.put("Key2", 2);
map.put("Key3", 3);
```

Now 1 is associated with "Key1", 2 with "Key2" and 3 with "Key3".

**HashMap allows nullable keys and values**. It is **good practice to use immutable objects as key**.

### How to Get Value by Key

There are 2 methods to retrieve value from HashMap:

* **public V get(Object key)** - returns a value for a specific key.
* **public V getOrDefault(Object key, V defaultValue)** - if value if null returns default value, otherwise current value.

Example:

```java
map.get("Key1");
map.get("Not Existing Key");
map.getOrDefault("Not Existing Key", 5);
```

### How to Remove a Value

There are two useful methods to remove the value in Java HashMap:

* **public V remove(Object key)** - removes a value by key and return this value
* **public boolean remove(Object key, Object value)** - removes an entry only if key and value matches, return true if entry deleted. 

Example:

```java
map.remove("Key1"); // returns 1
map.remove("Not Existing Key"); // returns null
map.remove("Key2", 10000); // returns false, because values not matches
map.remove("Key3", 3); // returns true
```

If you want to remove entries by the specific value you can get **entrySet()** and use **removeIf()** method:

```java
map.entrySet().removeIf(entry -> Integer.valueOf(3).equals(entry.getValue()));
```

**removeIf()** method accepts a **Predicate** (functional interface) that return true if entry should be removed.

If you want to remove all entries in HashMap you can use **clear()** method:

```java
map.clear();
```

### Internal Implementation 

**Inside of HashMap is a usual array!**

```java
transient Node<K,V>[] table;
```

Each array cell contains a reference to a head Node of a linked list, sometimes this cell is called bucket.

So how HashMap **put()** method works internally?

First of all, let's define what is a collision in Java HashMap and how put method resolved it.

The collision is a situation when two objects **hashCode()** returns the same value, but **equals()** return false.

An algorithm is the following:

* get **hashCode()** value from the key object.
* find an index in the array for that hash code.
* get a head node of the linked list by index in the array.
* iterating through the list and comparing node values and given value using equals() method.
* if equals() returns false for all values in the list – new node is added to the tail otherwise, node value is replaced with a given value.

If a number of buckets (capacity, a default value is 16) * load factor (0.75 by default) < number of elements – HashMap increases capacity in two times and internal objects are rehashed (internal array is rebuilt).

get() method works in the same way:

1. find an index
2. iterate through the list and compare node values using equals()
3. if equals() return true – returns a value, otherwise returns null

### Performance (Java HashMap Time Complexity O(n))

| Method              | Complexity |
|---------------------|------------|
| get(Object key)     | O(1)       |
| remove(Object key)  | O(1)       |
| put(K key, V value) | O(1)       |


If you have a lot of collisions before Java 8 time complexity could grow even to O(n) becuase it is an array of linked lists inside of HashMap and if all values are associated to the same cell(bucket) you need to iterate through the whole list to find required value.

**Since Java 8 if HashMap contains more than 7 elements in the same bucket linked list transforms to a tree and time complecity changes to O(log n)**.

Java 8 has come with the following **improvements/changes** of HashMap objects in case of high collisions.

* The alternative String hash function added in Java 7 has been removed.
* Buckets containing a large of number of colliding keys will stored their entries in a balanced tree instead of a linked list after certain threshold is reached. 

#### How linked list is replaced with binary tree?

In Java 8, HashMap replaces linkedlist with a binary tree when the number of element in a backet reaches certain threshold. While converting the list to binary tree, hashcode is used as a branching variable. If there are two different hashcodes in the same bucket, one is considered bigger goes to the right of the tree and other one to the left. But when both the hashcode are equal, HashMap assumes that the keys are comparable, and compares the key to determine the direction so that some order can be maintained. **It is a good practice to make the keys of HashMap comparable**.

This JDK 8 change applies only to** HashMap, LinkedHashMap and ConcurrentHashMap**.


Reference:

https://explainjava.com/java-hashmap/

https://www.nagarro.com/en/blog/post/24/performance-improvement-for-hashmap-in-java-8#:~:text=In%20worst%20case%20scenario%2C%20when,Java%207%20has%20been%20removed.










