# Binary Search

Binary Search is used with sorted array or list. In binary search, we follow the following steps:

1. We start by comparing the element to be searched with the element in the middle of the list/array.
2. If we get a match, we return the index of the middle element.
3. If we do not get a match, we check wheter the element to be searched is less or greater than in value than the middle element.
4. If the element/number to be searched is greater in value than the middle number, then we pick the elements on the right side of the middle element(as the list/array is sorted, hence on the right, we will have all the numbers greater than the middle number), and start again from the step 1.
5. If the element/number to be searched is lesser in value than the middle number, then we pick the elements on the left side of the middle element, and start again from the step 1.

**Binary search is useful when there are large number of elements in an array and they are sorted**.

**So a necessary conditon for Binary search to work is that the list/array should be sorted**.

## Features of Binary Search

1. It is great to search through large sorted arrays.
2. It has a time complexity of **O(log n)** which is a very good time complexity. 
3. It has simple implementation.

```java
public static int recusiveBinarySearch(int[] values, int target, int min, int max)
{
    if(values == null || values.length == 0)
        return -1;

    if(max < min)
        return -1;

    int mid = (min + max) / 2;
    if(target == values[mid])
        return mid;
    else if(target < values[mid])
        return recusiveBinarySearch(values, target, min, mid-1);
    else
        return recusiveBinarySearch(values, target, mid+1, max);

}

public static int binarySearch(int[] values, int target)
{
    if(values == null || values.length == 0)
        return -1;

    int min = 0;
    int max = values.length - 1;

    while(min <= max)
    {
        int mid = (min + max) / 2;
        if(values[min] < target)
            min = mid + 1;
        else if(values[mid] > target)
            max = mid - 1;
        else
            return mid;
    }

    return -1;
}
```

## Counting the Number of Steps

Every incorrect guess, binary search cuts down the list of elements into half. So if we start with 32 elements, after first unsuccessful guess, we will be left with 16 elements.

So consider an array with 8 elements, after the first unsuccessful, binary sort will cut down the list to half, leaving behind 4 elements, then 2 elements after the second unsuccessful guess, and finally only 1 element will be left, which will either be target or not, checking that will involve one more step. So all in all binary search **needed at most 4 guesses to search the target** in an array with 8 elements.

If the size of the list would have been 16, then after the first unsuccessful guess, we would have been left with 8 elements. And after that, as we know, we need atmost 4 guesses, add 1 guess to cut down the list from 16 to 8, that brings us to 5 guesses.

So we can say, as the number of elements are getting doubled, the number of guesses required to find the target increments by 1

Generalizing this, we can say, for an array with n elements,

**the number of times we can repeatedly halve, starting at n, until we get the value 1, plus one.**

And guess what, in mathematics, the function log2 n means exactly same. We have already seen how the log function works above, did you notice something there?

For n = 8, the output of log2 n comes out to be 3, which means the array can be halved 3 times maximum, hence the number of steps(at most) to find the target value will be (3 + 1) = 4.

Reference

https://www.studytonight.com/data-structures/search-algorithms

https://www.studytonight.com/data-structures/binary-search-algorithm